feat: add security best practices (#397)
tact-lang/tact-docs: pages/book/security-best-practices.mdx

> # Security Best Practices

Reviewer: Some of the examples below demonstrate "harmful actions", while others describe "how-to's". I suggest that there would be another level of headings, and all bad things would be listed under `## Common pitfalls`, while all good things would be listed under `## Best practices`. All the current h2 (`##`) headings would become h3 (`###`) ones.

Alternatively, you might consider combining both under "best practices", since that's the title of the page. In this case, please, name the headings in a positive way (`## Use or do this` over `## Bad action not to perform`) and also provide "valid examples" ("recommendations") whenever possible :)

In Tact smart contracts there are various anti-patterns and potential attacks developers need to be cautious of. These can impact the security, efficiency, and correctness of the contracts. Below, are covered both common anti-patterns and attacks specific to Tact smart contracts.

## Send private data on chain

> Everything is stored on the blockchain. Remember that even if no private data is saved in the transaction, anyone can still get this data.

Reviewer: Please, clarify and elaborate. For example, I'd suggest using "privacy sensitive", just "sensitive" or "confidential" over "private", as the latter also implies that something cannot be read and/or is unaccessible.

Reviewer 2: I'd rewrite this paragraph, because `Remember that even if no private data is saved in the transaction, anyone can still get this data.` seems confusing.

You probably meant that the whole smart contract computation is transparent and if you had some confidential values in runtime these could be retrieved with a simple emulation (e.g. https://retracer.ton.org/).

> ## Incorrect use of signed/unsigned integer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Misuse of signed integers
```

The following is an example of incorrect use of a signed integer. In the `Vote` message, the `votes` type is `int32`. This can lead to fraud when the attacker sends the negative number of votes instead of positive one.

Invalid example:

```tact
message Vote {
    votes: Int as int32;
}

contract Sample {
    votes: Int as uint32 = 0;

    receive(msg: Vote) {
        self.votes += msg.votes;
    }
}
```

Unsigned integers are safer because they will error out if an overflow occurs, and signed integers are only used when they are really needed.

> ## Invalid throw values
> 
> Each time the TVM execution stops normally, it stops with exit codes `0` or `1`.
> Although it is done automatically, TVM execution can be interrupted directly in an unexpected way if exit codes `0` and `1` are thrown directly by either `throw(0)` or `throw(1)` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Throwing exit codes of normal execution

Exit codes $0$ and $1$ indicate normal TVM execution of the compute phase of the transaction. Execution can be unexpectedly aborted by calling [`throw(){:tact}`](https://docs.tact-lang.org/ref/core-debug#throw) (or [similar functions](https://docs.tact-lang.org/ref/core-debug)) directly with exit codes $0$ and $1$, which can make debugging very difficult since this aborted execution would be considered normal.
```

Invalid example:

```tact
throw(0);
throw(1);
```

## Insecure random numbers

Note that [`random()`](/ref/core-random#random) function is pseudo-random and depends on [logical time](https://docs.ton.org/develop/smart-contracts/guidelines/message-delivery-guarantees#what-is-a-logical-time). A hacker can predict random by brute-forcing the logical time in the current block.

> Invalid example:

Reviewer: Is there a valid example then?

Reviewer 2: there's no 100% reliable and secure way for random generation in TON currently, so if something very important depends on the result (lotteries, gambling, etc), I'd suggest not to build it fully on-chain, or come up with some custom solutions for RNG

```tact
if (random(1, 10) == 7) {
  ... send reward ...
}
```

## Optimized message handling

The frontend should handle string parsing from human-friendly formats into machine-readable binary structures.
This ensures that only optimized, compact messages are sent to the blockchain, reducing computational and storage costs.

> By doing this, you avoid overloading the blockchain with unnecessary processing, thereby improving efficiency.

Reviewer 2: Blockchain will be fine, as well as the smart contract, haha :)
But fees (both gas and forward) will be higher when using some human readable strings instead of binary structs.

All interactions between the frontend and smart contracts should be through pre-processed binary messages.

Invalid example:

```tact
message Sample {
    field: String;
}

receive(msg: Sample) {
    let parsed = field.fromBase64();
}
```

## Gas limitation

Be careful with the `Out of gas error`. It cannot be handled, so try to precalculate the gas consumption for each receiver using tests, if possible.
This will help not to waste extra gas, because the transaction will fail anyway.

Recommendation:

```tact
message Vote {
    votes: Int as int32;
}

contract Sample2 {
    const voteGasUsage = 10000; // precompute with tests

    receive(msg: Vote) {

>         require(context().value > getStorageFee(self.voteGasUsage, false), "Not enough gas!");

Reviewer 2: you probably confused `getComputeFee` with `getStorageFee`

    }
}
```

## Identity validation

> Always validate identity of the sender if needed. This may be achieved through [`Ownable`](/ref/stdlib-ownable) trait or using state init validation for jettons and NFTs.

Reviewer 2: devs rarely have to verify NFTs and Jettons by their stateinits, and it's not even possible usually, because some tokens may have modified code.

The more common pattern is to verify tokens by their addresses (item address for NFTs and wallet address for Jettons)

```ts
// TODO add links after jetton and nft pages merged
```

## Replay protection

Replay protection is a security mechanism to prevent an attacker from reusing a previous message. More about replay protection may be found [here](https://docs.ton.org/develop/smart-contracts/guidelines/external-messages).

Recommendation:

```tact
message Msg {
    seqno: Int as uint64;
}

contract Sample {
    seqno: Int as uint64;

    receive(msg: Msg) {
        require(self.seqno == msg.seqno, "Invalid seqno");
        self.seqno += 1;
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Replay protection occurs more often in external messages, not in internals, because those are being executed multiple times by default. But even there, the main logic of the smart contract (some values changing in stored data) usually prevents repeated executions already.

I wrote dozens of DeFi smart contracts and didn't ever have to use special `seqno` in them.

## Race condition of messages

A message cascade can be processed over many blocks. Assume that while one message flow is running, an attacker can initiate a second one in parallel.

> That is, if a property was checked at the beginning (e.g. whether the user has enough tokens), do not assume that at the third stage in the same contract they will still satisfy this property.

Reviewer 2: This one is probably most important and most complex thing across all these bad practices and recommendations.

This does not only include the race condition of two messages sent by different users, but also race conditions of internal messages between contracts in the same system.

I had to think about this a lot while writing and auditing DeFi smart contracts, because any little flaw in this logic can lead to huge loss of funds if a malicious party finds out.

## Handle/Send bounced messages

Send messages with bounce flag. Bounced messages means that other contract execution failed. You may want to deal with it by rolling back contract's state.

Recommendation:

```tact
contract JettonWallet {
    balance: Int as coins;

    bounced(src: bounced<TokenTransferInternal>) {
        self.balance += src.amount;
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: I'd expand this example to be closer to something real and understandable.
